<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 class="nobreak" id="CHAPTER_<span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>">CHAPTER <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span></h2>
			<p>The next day she dressed very carefully in a fresh white waist and her Indianhead skirt and went down to the telegraph-office to ask for a job. She knew where to find the office; she had often looked at its plate-glass front lettered in blue during her lonely walks on the crowded street. Her heart thumped loudly and her knees were weak when she went through the open door.</p>
			<p>The big room was cut across by a long counter, on which a young man lounged in his shirt-sleeves, a green eye-shade pushed back on his head. Behind him telegraph instruments clattered loudly, disturbing the stifling quiet of the hot morning. The young man looked at her curiously.</p>
			<p>“Manager? Won’t I do?” he asked.</p>
			<p>She heard her voice quavering:</p>
			<p>“I’d rather see him⁠—if he’s busy⁠—I could⁠—wait.”</p>
			<p>The manager rose from the desk where he had been sitting. He was a tall, thin man, with thin hair combed carefully over the top of his head. His lips were thin, too, and there were deep creases on either side of his mouth, like parentheses. His eyes looked her over, interested. He was sorry, he said. He didn’t need another operator. She had experience?</p>
			<p>She was a graduate of Weeks’ School of Telegraphy, she told him breathlessly. She could send perfectly, she wasn’t so sure of her receiving, but she would be awfully careful not to make mistakes. She had to have a job, she just had to have a job; it didn’t matter how much it paid, anything. She felt that she could not walk out of that office. She clung to the edge of the counter as if she were drowning and it were a life-line.</p>
			<p>“Well⁠—come in. I’ll see what you can do,” he said. He swung open a door in the counter, and she followed him between the tables. There was a dusty instrument on a battered desk, back by the big switchboard. The manager took a message from a hook and gave it to her. “Let’s hear you send that.”</p>
			<p>She began painstakingly. The young man with the eye-shade had wandered over. He stood leaning against a table, listening, and after she had made a few letters she felt that a glance passed between him and the manager, over her head. She finished the message, even adding a careful period. She thought she had done very well. When she looked up the manager said kindly:</p>
			<p>“Not so bad! You’ll be an operator some day.”</p>
			<p>“If you’ll only give me a chance,” she pleaded.</p>
			<p>He said that he would take her address and let her know. She felt that the young man was slightly amused. She gave the manager her name and the street number. He repeated it in surprise.</p>
			<p>“You’re staying with Kittie Brown?” Again a glance passed over her head. Both of them looked at her with intensified interest, for which she saw no reason. “Yes,” she replied. She felt keenly that it was an awkward moment, and bewilderment added to her confusion. The young man turned away and, sitting down, began to send a pile of messages, working very busily, sending with his right hand and marking off the messages with his left. But she felt that his attention was still upon her and the manager.</p>
			<p>“Well! And you want to work here?” The manager rubbed one hand over his chin, smiling. “I don’t know. I might.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, if you would!”</p>
			<p>He hesitated for an agonizing moment.</p>
			<p>“Well, I’ll think about it. Come and see me again.” He held her fingers warmly when they shook hands, and she returned the pressure gratefully. She felt that he was very kind. She felt, too, that she had conducted the interview very well, and returning hope warmed her while she went back to her room.</p>
			<p>That afternoon she had a visitor. She had written her weekly letter to her mother, saying that she had almost finished school and was expecting to get a job, hesitating a long time, miserably, before she added that she did not have much money left and would like to borrow another five dollars. She had eaten a stale roll and an apple and was considering how long she could make the meal-ticket last when she heard the knock on her door.</p>
			<p>She opened it in surprise, thinking there had been a mistake. A stout, determined-looking woman stood there, a well-dressed woman who wore black gloves and a veil. Immediately Helen felt herself young, inexperienced, a child in firm hands.</p>
			<p>“You’re Helen Davies? I’m <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell.” She stepped into the room, Helen giving way before her assured advance. She swept the place with one look. “What on earth was your mother thinking of, leaving you in a place like this? Did you know what you were getting into?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t⁠—what⁠—w-won’t you take a chair?” said Helen.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell sat down gingerly, very erect. They looked at each other.</p>
			<p>“I might as well talk straight out to you,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell said, as if it were a customary phrase. “I met <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Morris, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Updike’s sister, at the lodge convention in Oakland last week, and she told me about you, and I promised to look you up. Well, when I found out! I told <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Campbell I was coming straight down here to talk to you. If you want to stay in a place like this, well and good, it’s your affair. Though I should feel it my duty to write to your mother. I wouldn’t want my own girl left in a strange town, at your age, and nobody taking any interest in her.”</p>
			<p>“I’m sure it’s very kind.” Helen murmured in bewilderment.</p>
			<p>“Well,”⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell drew a long breath and plunged⁠—“I suppose you know the sort of person this Kittie Brown, she calls herself, is? I suppose you know she’s a bad woman?”</p>
			<p>A wave of blackness went through the girl’s mind.</p>
			<p>“Everybody in town knows what <em>she</em> is,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell continued. “Everybody knows⁠—” She went on, her voice growing more bitter. Helen, half hearing the words, choked back a sick impulse to ask her to stop talking. She felt that everything about her was poisoned; she wanted to escape, to hide, to feel that she would never be seen again by any one. When the hard voice had stopped it was an effort to speak.</p>
			<p>“But⁠—what will I do?”</p>
			<p>“Do? I should think you’d want to get out of here just as quick as you could.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I do want to. But where can I go? I⁠—my rent’s paid. I haven’t any money.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell considered.</p>
			<p>“Well, you will have money, won’t you? Your folks don’t expect you to live here on nothing, do they? If it’s only a day or two, I could take you in myself rather than leave you in a place like this. There’s plenty of decent places in town.” She became practical. “The first thing to do’s to pack your things right away. How long is your rent paid? Can’t you get some of it back?”</p>
			<p>She waited while Helen packed. She did not stop talking, and Helen tried to answer her coherently and gratefully. She felt that she should be grateful. They went down the stairs, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell waited outside the restaurant while Helen went in to ask <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Brown to refund the week’s rent.</p>
			<p>It was noon, but there were only one or two people in the restaurant. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Brown’s smile faded when Helen stammered that she was leaving.</p>
			<p>“You are? What’s wrong? Anybody been bothering you?” Her glance fell upon the waiting <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell, and her sallow face whitened. “Oh, that’s it, is it?”</p>
			<p>“No,” Helen said hastily. “That is, it’s been very nice here, and I liked it, but a friend of mine⁠—she wants me to stay with her. I’m sorry to leave, but I haven’t much money.” She struggled against feeling pity for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Brown. She choked over asking her to refund the rent.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Brown said she could not do it. She offered, however, to give Helen something in trade, two dollars’ worth. They both tried to make the transaction commonplace and dignified.</p>
			<p>Helen, at a loss, pointed out a heap of peanut candy in the glass counter. She had often looked at it and wished she could afford to buy some. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Brown’s thin hands shook, but she was piling the candy on the scale when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell came in.</p>
			<p>“What’s she doing?” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell asked Helen. “You buying candy?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know what business it is of yours, coming interfering with me!” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Brown broke out. “I never did her any harm. I never even talked to her. You ask her if I ever bothered her. You ask her if I didn’t leave her alone. You ask her if I ain’t keeping a decent, respectable, quiet place and doing the best I can and minding my own business and trying to make a square living. You ask her what I ever did to her all the time she’s been here.” Her voice was high and shrill. Tears were rolling down her face. Mechanically she went on breaking up the candy and piling it on the scales. “I don’t know what I ever did to you that you don’t leave me alone, coming poking around.”</p>
			<p>“I didn’t come here to talk to you,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell. “Come on out of here,” she commanded Helen.</p>
			<p>“I wish to God you’d mind your own business!” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Brown cried after them. “If you’d only tend to your own affairs, you <em>good</em> people!” She hurled the words after them like a curse, her voice breaking with sobs. The door slammed under <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell’s angry hand.</p>
			<p>Helen, shaking and quivering, tried not to be sorry for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Brown. She was ashamed of the feeling. She knew that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell did not have it. Hurrying to keep pace with that furious lady’s haste down the street, she was overwhelmed with shame and confusion. The whole affair was like a splash of mud upon her. Her cheeks were red, and she could not make herself meet <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell’s eyes.</p>
			<p>Even when they were on the street-car, safely away from it all, her awkwardness increased. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell herself was a little disconcerted then. She looked at Helen, at the bulging telescope-bag, the shabby shoes, and the faded sailor hat, and Helen felt the gaze like a burn. She knew that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell was wondering what on earth to do with her.</p>
			<p>Pride and helplessness and shame choked her. She tried to respond to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell’s efforts at conversation, but she could not, though she knew that her failure made <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell think her sullen. Her rescuer’s impatient tone was cutting her like the lash of a whip before they got off the car.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell lived in splendor in a two-story white house on a complacent street. The smoothness of the well-kept lawns, the immaculate propriety of the swept cement walks, cried out against Helen’s shabbiness. She had never been so aware of it. When she was seated in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell’s parlor, oppressed by the velvet carpet and the piano and the bead portieres, she tried to hide her feet beneath the chair and did not know what to do with her hands.</p>
			<p>She answered <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell’s questions because she must, but she felt that her last coverings of reticence and self-respect were being torn from her. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell offered only one word of advice.</p>
			<p>“The thing for you to do is to go home.”</p>
			<p>“No,” Helen said. “I⁠—I can’t⁠—do that.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell looked at her curiously, and again the red flamed in Helen’s cheeks. She said nothing about the mortgage. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell had not asked about that.</p>
			<p>“Well, you can stay here a few days.”</p>
			<p>She lugged the telescope-bag up the stairs, the wooden steps of which shone like glass. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell showed her a room at the end of the hall. A mass of things filled it; children’s toys, old baskets, a broken chair. It was like the closets at home, but larger. It was large enough to hold a narrow white iron bed, a wash-stand, and a chair, and still leave room to swing the door open. These things appeared when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell had dragged out the others.</p>
			<p>Watching her swift, efficient motions in silence, Helen tried again to feel gratitude. But the fact that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell expected it made it impossible. She could only stand awkwardly, longing for the moment when she would be alone. When at last <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell went down-stairs she shut the door quickly and softly. She wanted to fling herself on the sagging bed and cry, but she did not. She stood with clenched hands, looking into the small, blurred mirror over the wash-stand. A white, tense face looked back at her with burning eyes. She said to it, “You’re going to do something, do you hear? You’re going to do something quick!” Although she did not know what she could do, she could keep her self-control by telling herself that she would do something.</p>
			<p>Some time later she heard the shouts of children and the clatter of pans in the kitchen below. It was almost supper-time. She took a cinnamon roll from the paper sack in her bag, but she could not eat it. She was looking at it when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell called up the back stairs, “Miss Davies! Come to supper.”</p>
			<p>She braced herself and went down. It was a good supper, but she could not eat very much. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Campbell sat at the head of the table, a stern-looking man who said little except to speak sharply to the children when they were too noisy. There were two children, a girl of nine and a younger boy in a sailor suit. They looked curiously at Helen and did not reply when she tried to talk to them. She perceived that they had been told to leave her alone, and she felt that her association with a woman like <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Brown was still visible upon her like a splash of mud.</p>
			<p>When she timidly offered to help with the dishes after supper <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell told her that she did not need any help. Her tone was not unkind, but Helen felt the rebuff, and fearing she would cry, she went quickly up-stairs.</p>
			<p>She looked at Paul’s picture for some time before she put it back into her bag where she thought <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell would not see it. Then, sitting on the edge of the bed under a flickering gas-jet, she wrote him a long letter. She told him that she had moved, and in describing the street, the beautiful house, the furniture in the parlor, she drew such a picture of comfort and happiness that its reflection warmed her somewhat. It was a beautiful letter, she thought, reading it over several times before she carefully turned out the gas and went to bed.</p>
			<p>Early in the morning she went to the telegraph-office and pleaded again for a job. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Roberts, the manager, was very friendly, talking to her for some time and patting her hand in a manner which she thought fatherly and found comforting. He told her to come back. He might do something.</p>
			<p>She went back every morning for a week, and often in the afternoons. The rest of the time she wandered in the streets or sat on a bench in the park. She felt under such obligations when she ate <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell’s food that several times she did not return to the house until after dark, when supper would be finished. She had to ring the door-bell, for the front door was kept locked, and each time <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell asked her sharply where she had been. She always answered truthfully.</p>
			<p>At the end of the week she received a letter from her mother, telling her to come home at once and sending her five dollars for the fare. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell had written to her, and she was horrified and alarmed.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>Your father says we might have known it and saved our money, and I blame myself for ever letting you go. I don’t say it will be easy for you here, short as we are this winter, but you ought to be glad you have a good home to come to even if it isn’t very fine, and don’t worry about the money, for your father won’t say a word. Just you come home right away. Lovingly,</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Your Mother</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Helen hated <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell. What right had that woman to worry her mother? Helen could get along all right by herself, and she wrote her mother that she could. She had a job at last. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Roberts had made a place for her in the office, as a clerk at five dollars a week. She did not mention the wages to her mother; she said only that she had a job, and her mother was not to worry. She would be making more money soon and could send some home.</p>
			<p>The letter had been waiting for her, propped on the hall table, when she hurried in, eager to tell <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell the glad news. Her anger when she read it was obscurely a relief. The compulsion to feel gratitude toward <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell was lifted from her. She wrote her answer and hastened to drop it in the corner mail-box.</p>
			<p>Running back to the house, she met <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell returning from a sewing-circle meeting. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell was neatly hatted and gloved, and the expression in her pale blue eyes behind the dotted veil suddenly made Helen realize how blow-away she looked, bare-headed, her loosened hair ruffled by the breeze, her blouse sagging under the arms. She stood awkwardly self-conscious while <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell unlocked the front door.</p>
			<p>“Did you get your mother’s letter?”</p>
			<p>“Yes. I got it.”</p>
			<p>“Well, what did she say?”</p>
			<p>Helen did not answer that.</p>
			<p>“I got a job,” she said. Her breath came quickly.</p>
			<p>“You have? What kind of job?”</p>
			<p>Helen told her. They were in the hall now, standing by the golden-oak hat-rack at the foot of the stairs. The children watched, wide-eyed, in the parlor door.</p>
			<p>Perplexity and disgust struggled on <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell’s face.</p>
			<p>“You think you’re going to live in Sacramento on five dollars a week?”</p>
			<p>“I’m going to. I got to. I’ll manage somehow. I won’t go home!” Helen cried, confronting <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell like an antagonist.</p>
			<p>“Oh, I don’t doubt you’ll <em>manage</em>!” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell said cuttingly. She went down the hall, and the slam of the dining-room door shouted that she washed her hands of the whole affair.</p>
			<p>She came up the back stairs half an hour later. Helen was sitting on the bed, her bag packed, trying to plan what to do. She had only the five dollars. It would be two weeks before she could get more money from the office. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell opened the door without knocking.</p>
			<p>“I’m going to talk this over with you,” she said, patient firmness in her tone. “Don’t you realize you can’t get a decent room and anything to eat for five dollars a week? Do you think it’s right to expect your folks to support you, poor as they are? It isn’t⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I don’t expect them to!” Helen cried.</p>
			<p>“As though you didn’t have a good home to go back to,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell conveyed subtly that a well-bred girl did not interrupt while an older woman was speaking. “Now be reasonable about this, my⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I won’t go back,” Helen said. She lifted miserable eyes to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell’s, and the expression she saw there reminded her of a horse with his ears laid back.</p>
			<p>“Then you’ve decided, I suppose, where you <em>are</em> going?”</p>
			<p>“No⁠—I don’t know. Where could I begin to look for a⁠—nice room that I can live in on my wages?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell exclaimed impatiently. Her almost ruthless capability in dealing with situations did not prepare her to meet gracefully one that she could not handle. Her voice grew colder, and the smooth cheeks beneath the smooth, fair hair reddened while she continued to talk. Her arguments, her grudging attempts at persuasion, her final outburst of unconcealed anger, were futile. Helen would not go home. She meant to keep her job and to live on the wages.</p>
			<p>“Well, then I guess you’ll have to stay here. I can’t turn you out on the streets.”</p>
			<p>“How much would you charge for the room?” said Helen.</p>
			<p>“Charge!” Helen flushed again at the scorn in the word.</p>
			<p>“I couldn’t stay unless I paid you something. I’d have to do that.”</p>
			<p>“Well, of all the ungrateful⁠—!”</p>
			<p>Tears came into Helen’s eyes. She knew <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell meant well, and though she did not like her, she wished to thank her. But she did not know how to do it without yielding somewhat to the implacable force of the older woman. She could only repeat doggedly that she must pay for the room.</p>
			<p>She was left shaken, but with a sense of victory emphasized by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell’s inarticulate exclamation as she went out. It was arranged that Helen should pay five dollars a month for the room.</p>
			<p>But the bitterness of living in that house, on terms which she felt were charity, increased daily. She tried to make as little trouble as possible, stealing in at the back door so that no one would have to answer her ring, making her bed neatly, and slipping out early so that she would not meet any of the family. She spent her evenings at the office or at the library, where she could forget herself in books and in writing long letters. For some inexplicable reason this seemed to exasperate <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell, who inquired where she had been and did not hide a belief that her replies were lies. Helen felt like a suspected criminal. She would have left the house if she could have found another room that she could afford.</p>
			<p>It was only at the office that she could breathe freely. She worked from eight in the morning to six at night, and then until the office closed at nine o’clock she could practise on the telegraph instrument behind the tables where the real wires came in. She worked hard at it, for at last she was on the road to the little station where she would work with Paul. She felt that she could never be grateful enough to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Roberts for giving her the chance.</p>
			<p>He was very kind. Often he came behind the screen where she was studying and talked to her for a long time. He was surprised at first by her working so hard. He seemed to think she had not meant to do it. But his manner was so warmly friendly that one day when he took her hand, saying, “What’s the big idea, little girl⁠—keeping me off like this?” she told him about everything but Paul. She told him about the farm and the mortgage and the failure of the fruit crop, even, shamefaced, about <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weeks’ drinking, and that she did not know what she would have done if she had not got the job. She was very grateful to him and tried to tell him so.</p>
			<p>He said drily not to bother about that, and she felt that she had offended him. Perhaps her story had sounded as if she were begging for more money, she thought with burning cheeks. For several days he gave her a great deal of hard work to do and was cross when she made mistakes. She did her best, trying hard to please him, and he was soon very friendly again.</p>
			<p>His was the only friendliness she found to warm her shivering spirit, and she became daily more grateful to him for it. Though she was puzzled by his displays of affectionate interest in her and his sudden cold withdrawals when she eagerly thanked him, this was only part of the bewildering atmosphere of the office, in which she felt many undercurrents that she could not understand.</p>
			<p>The young operator with the green eye-shade, for instance, always regarded her with a cynical and slightly amused eye, which she resented without knowing why. When she laid messages beside his key, he covered her hand with his if he could, and sometimes when she sat working he came and put his hand on her shoulder. She was always angry, for she felt contempt in his attitude toward her, but she did not know how to show her resentment without making too much of the incidents.</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> McCormick, leave me alone!” she said impatiently. “I want to work.”</p>
			<p>“Just what <em>is</em> the game?” he drawled.</p>
			<p>“What do you mean?” she asked, reddening under that cool, satirical gaze. He looked at her, grinning until she felt only that she hated him. Or sometimes he said something like: “Oh, well, I’m not butting in. It’s up to you and the boss,” and strolled away, whistling.</p>
			<p>Much looking at life from the back-door keyhole of the telegraph-operator’s point of view had made him blasé and wearily worldly-wise at twenty-two. He knew that every pretty face was moulded on a skeleton, and was convinced that all lives contained one. Only virtue could have surprised him, and he could not have been convinced that it existed. When he was on duty in the long, slow evenings, Helen, practising diligently behind her screen, heard him singing thoughtfully:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
				<p>
					<span>“Life’s a funny proposition after all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just why we’re here and what it’s all about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It’s a problem that has driven many brainy men to drink,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It’s a problem that they’ve never figured out.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Life seemed simple enough to Helen. She would be a telegraph-operator soon, earning as much as fifty dollars a month. She could repay the hundred dollars then, buy some new clothes, and have plenty to eat. She would try to get a job at the Ripley station⁠—always in the back of her mind was the thought of Paul⁠—and she planned the furnishing of housekeeping rooms, and thought of making curtains and embroidering centerpieces.</p>
			<p>It was spring when he wrote that he was coming to spend a day in Sacramento. He was going to Masonville to help his mother move to Ripley. On the way he would stop and see Helen.</p>
			<p>Helen, in happy excitement, thought of her clothes. She must have something new to wear when they met. Paul must see in the first glance how much she had changed, how much she had improved. She had not been able to save anything, but she must, she must have new clothes. Two days of worried planning brought her courage to the point of approaching <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Roberts and asking him for her next month’s salary in advance. Next month’s food was a problem she could meet later. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Roberts was very kind about it.</p>
			<p>“Money? Of course!” he said. He took a bill from his own pocket-book. “We’ll have to see about your getting more pretty soon.” Her heart leaped. He put the bill in her palm, closing his hand around hers. “Going to be good to me if I do?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I’d do anything in the world I could for you,” she said, looking at him gratefully. “You’re so good! Thank you ever so much.” His look struck her as odd, but a customer came in at that moment, and in taking the message she forgot about it.</p>
			<p>She went out at noon and bought a white, pleated, voile skirt for five dollars, a China-silk waist for three-ninety-five, and a white, straw sailor. And that afternoon McCormick, with his cynical smile, handed her a note that had come over the wire for her. “Arrive eight ten Sunday morning. Meet me. <span class="smcap">Paul.</span>”</p>
			<p>She was so radiantly self-absorbed all the afternoon that she hardly saw the thundercloud gathering in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Roberts’ eyes, and she went back to her room that evening so confidently happy that she rang the door-bell without her usual qualm. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell’s lips were drawn into a tight, thin line.</p>
			<p>“There’s some packages for you,” she said.</p>
			<p>“Yes, I know. I bought some clothes. Thank you for taking them in,” said Helen. She felt friendly even toward <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell. “A white, voile skirt, and a silk waist, and a hat. Would⁠—would you like to see them?”</p>
			<p>“No, <em>thank</em> you!” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Campbell, icily. Going up the stairs, Helen heard her speaking to her husband. “ ‘I bought some clothes,’ she says, bold as brass. Clothes!”</p>
			<p>Helen wondered, hurt, how people could be so unkind. She knew that the clothes were an extravagance, but she did want them so badly, for Paul, and it seemed to her that she had worked hard enough to deserve them. Besides, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Roberts had said that she might get a raise.</p>
			<p>She was dressed and creeping noiselessly out of the house at seven o’clock the next morning. The spring dawn was coming rosily into the city after a night of rain; the odor of the freshly washed lawns and flower-beds was delicious, and birds sang in the trees. The flavor of the cool, sweet air and the warmth of the sunshine mingled with her joyful sense of youth and coming happiness. She looked very well, she thought, watching her slim white reflection in the shop-windows.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
